Taras Hryhorovych Shevchenko (March 9 [O.S. February 25] 1814 – March 10 [O.S. February 26] 1861) 
was a Ukrainian poet, writer, artist, public and political figure, as well as 
folklorist and ethnographer. His literary heritage is regarded to be the 
foundation of modern Ukrainian literature and, to a large extent, the modern 
Ukrainian language. Shevchenko is also known for many masterpieces as a painter 
and an illustrator.

He was a member of the Sts Cyril and Methodius Brotherhood and an academician 
of the Imperial Academy of Arts. In 1847 Shevchenko was politically convicted 
for writing in the Ukrainian language, promoting the independence of Ukraine 
and ridiculing the members of the Russian Imperial House.

CHILDHOOD

Taras Shevchenko was born on March 9 [O.S. February 25] 1814 in the village of Moryntsi, 
Zvenyhorodka county, Kiev Governorate, Russian Empire (today Zvenyhorodka Raion, 
Ukraine). He was the third child after his sister Kateryna and brother Mykyta,
in family of serf peasants Hryhoriy Ivanovych Shevchenko (1782? – 1825) and 
Kateryna Yakymivna Shevchenko (Boiko) (1782? – August 6, 1823), both of whom were 
owned by landlord Vasily Engelhardt. According to the family legends, Taras's 
forefathers were Cossacks who served in the Zaporizhian Host and had taken part 
in the Ukrainian uprisings of the 17th and 18th centuries. Those uprisings were 
brutally suppressed in Cherkasy, Poltava, Kiev, Bratslav, and Chernihiv 
disrupting normal social life for many years afterwards. Most of the local 
population were then enslaved and reduced to poverty.

In 1816 Shevchenko family moved back to the village of Kyrylivka (today Shevchenkove) 
in Zvenyhorodka county, where Taras' father, Hryhoriy Ivanovych, had been born. 
Taras spent his childhood years in the village. On May 24 [O.S. May 12] 1816, 
Taras' sister Yaryna was born, and on February 7 [O.S. January 26] 1819 - 
Maria. Once, young Taras went looking for "the iron pillars that hold up the sky" 
and got lost. Chumaks who met the boy took him with him to Kerelivka. On March 20 
[O.S. March 8] 1821 Taras' brother Yosyp was born.

In the fall of 1822 Taras started to take some grammar classes at a local precentor 
(dyak) Sovhyr. At that time Shevchenko became familiar with Hryhoriy Skovoroda's 
works. During 1822-1828 Shevchenko painted horses and soldiers.

IMPACT

Taras Shevchenko's writings formed the foundation for the modern Ukrainian 
literature to a degree that he is also considered the founder of the modern 
written Ukrainian language (although Ivan Kotlyarevsky pioneered the literary work 
in what was close to the modern Ukrainian in the end of the 18th century.) 
Shevchenko's poetry contributed greatly to the growth of Ukrainian national 
consciousness, and his influence on various facets of Ukrainian intellectual, 
literary, and national life is still felt to this day. Influenced by Romanticism, 
Shevchenko managed to find his own manner of poetic expression that encompassed 
themes and ideas germane to Ukraine and his personal vision of its past and future.

In view of his literary importance, the impact of his artistic work is often missed, 
although his contemporaries valued his artistic work no less, or perhaps even more, 
than his literary work. A great number of his pictures, drawings and etchings preserved 
to this day testify to his unique artistic talent. He also experimented with 
photography and it is little known that Shevchenko may be considered to have pioneered 
the art of etching in the Russian Empire (in 1860 he was awarded the title of Academician 
in the Imperial Academy of Arts specifically for his achievements in etching.)

